Hi Joanne, thanks for being with us today so that we can get to know a little bit more about what you do.

First of all, a big congratulations from us at the CWIA team for winning the educator award from the NLAF! That really exciting to see, congratulations.

Joanne: Great thank you very much!

Nisha: So you were recently appointed the Dean of Aviation at FNTI that was last year, 
and it is the first time someone has filled that role at the school.
Could you explain to us why that role was created?

Joanne: So FNTI is an Indigenous controlled institute and for the last couple of years the Ontario 
Indigenous institutes were recognized as equal educators in Ontario post-secondary sector. 
Because of that it allowed us to start building more capacity and to do that it started with a Dean position and I was fortunate to receive that role

Nisha: That's amazing what made you the best candidate for the role at the time?

Joanne: I think at the time since you know,  when you have a very low budget and you have kind of scarce 
resources in order to pull off such an amazing program; everybody wears a lot of different hats.
Everybody, like the whole crew wears a lot of different hats and I think because of the history
that I've had in the program and you know various partnerships that we developed and you know down
to the curriculum and student support and cultural advisors - then that made me the best candidate for the position.

Nisha: That sounds awesome! What are some of the skills you need to be a successful Dean?

Joanne: Coordination. Coordination for sure; communication skills and  again that sense of humour 
always helps! In a lot of, you know, diffusing a lot of situations ha ha
And just, you know, passion. Passion with the vision and mission of FNTI. We want to make sure all
of our priorities are are aligned in the same way and we are all in know and we're all moving in the right direction.

Nisha: It sounds like your team has a lot of fun working for you. 
What would you say have been some of the highlights from the past year in your role as Dean?

Joanne: Well I started as Dean, was appointed Dean in I believe it was June 2019 and then in July we launched our first annual aviation summer camp for Indigenous youth so that was absolutely incredible.
That was like a culmination of working with our own crew, with Indigenous owned airlines, with mainstream airlines with Indigenous communities to expose the career of aviation toward our youth
 and it was amazing we had twelve students come from across the country that were here for a week and we had an amazing schedule. They had two or three training flights in a 172 with a flight 
instructor and Sim sessions and cultural activities with our elders, they stayed overnight in our residence. 
We really wanted to make that first time for most of them being away from home in an educational environment a very positive experience so whether they choose a career in aviation or not- just the fact that they can go away from home, they can attend post-secondary and they know it's going to be a positive experience. That was my favourite thing over the last year.

And we had out of the 12 students, we had we had 10 women! We had 10 females out of 12! And we didn't even like, we don't market or we don't strategize or target women we just you know create an environment where you know where they want to come!
We started off with 10 females and 1 male and I then I actually felt bad for the one male! I thought "He can't be the only male" so we went to find somebody else, another camper to join him so that it was 10 females and 2 males.

Nisha: That's amazing and I think that it's indicative about the kind of enrolment you have in your aviation program as well, right? You have very high number of female enrolees? 

Joanne: We do, we do. This year we have about 48% females

Nisha: That's incredible. We have a lot to learn from you as an industry that is looking to expand that way. What would you say were some of the challenges that you faced in the last year?

Joanne: Well the last year definitely has been COVID. Prior to COVID, as everybody in aviation knows, there was a huge pilot shortage and then it turned into saturation of pilots within a matter of a couple of weeks. Then just knowing that the industry will come back and prepare people for that you know really it's a great time to get into aviation for training because by the time you graduate you know the industry will be on the come back. So that for sure and just the whole , 
"in-person" and all the different layers that were involved in bringing our students back to a safe environment because we have you know it's just not a matter of picking up the phone saying "yeah you can come on down now". They all go back to their communities and our leadership ensured that they were back in their communities on the cusp of the pandemic which was great.
We have to be respectful of the community restrictions that they have; we had to design a program where they would come for intensive flight training over a limited period of time so we have one third of the students here on campus with us at a time, and like major COVID policy- you know enhanced you know screening and cleaning and wearing masks at all times.
So that was the largest logistical challenge that I've faced in a while and so far so good! 
It's working out really well.

Nisha: That's really good to hear! So looking forward to when the pandemic is a thing of the past, do you see the changes that have been made to the flight training happens now as having a lasting impact on the way flight training happens?

Joanne: I think so, even just the enhanced cleaning. You know everybody cleans their aircraft, they're not necessarily sanitizing everything down all the time and you know, and even wearing you know once you find a mask that is comfortable to wear when you're flying, then you know I would almost prefer to have it that way.
You look at all the times in the past, you know everywhere you go- you go onto a major airline or in a small aircraft you know somebody had the Sniffles. It's just a more sanitary way of doing things.

Nisha: My last question is- if you could ask your role model in the industry anything, what would it be?

Joanne: Yeah this one for sure it is "Where were you?"
Where were you? I was, you know, part of the first generation of you know some of the first Indigenous pilots that were trained. Number one I didn't even know another female pilot. I didn't, I didn't know one.
We had each other, you know the students I went to school with and we kind of had our best guess on    what our next move was after that so that would be the question is you know where were you.
But now I know where they are and now I know where we are so we can definitely change that moving forward.

Nisha: Yes and I know that we appreciate it, a lot of the younger generation to have so many of you to look up to. that makes a huge difference for us. Thank you Joanne so much for talking to us today it's always a pleasure!

Joanne: Great, thank you very much!
